consumable_shortcut ^= scroll of identify:i
consumable_shortcut ^= scroll of teleportation:t
consumable_shortcut ^= scroll of fear:f
consumable_shortcut ^= scroll of noise:N
consumable_shortcut ^= scroll of summoning:s
consumable_shortcut ^= scroll of enchant weapon:w
consumable_shortcut ^= scroll of enchant armour:a
consumable_shortcut ^= scroll of torment:T
consumable_shortcut ^= scroll of immolation:I
consumable_shortcut ^= scroll of blinking:b
consumable_shortcut ^= scroll of revelation:r
consumable_shortcut ^= scroll of fog:g
consumable_shortcut ^= scroll of acquirement:A
consumable_shortcut ^= scroll of brand weapon:W
consumable_shortcut ^= scroll of vulnerability:V
consumable_shortcut ^= scroll of silence:S
consumable_shortcut ^= scroll of amnesia:x
consumable_shortcut ^= scroll of poison:p
consumable_shortcut ^= scroll of butterflies:s

consumable_shortcut ^= potion of curing:c
consumable_shortcut ^= potion of heal wounds:w
consumable_shortcut ^= potion of haste:h
consumable_shortcut ^= potion of might:m
consumable_shortcut ^= potion of brilliance:b
consumable_shortcut ^= potion of attraction:A
consumable_shortcut ^= potion of enlightenment:e
consumable_shortcut ^= potion of cancellation:C
consumable_shortcut ^= potion of ambrosia:a
consumable_shortcut ^= potion of invisibility:i
consumable_shortcut ^= potion of experience:E
consumable_shortcut ^= potion of magic:g
consumable_shortcut ^= potion of berserk rage:B
consumable_shortcut ^= potion of mutation:M
consumable_shortcut ^= potion of resistance:r
consumable_shortcut ^= potion of lignification:L

consumable_shortcut ^= wand of flame:a
consumable_shortcut ^= wand of acid:b
consumable_shortcut ^= wand of quicksilver:b
consumable_shortcut ^= wand of light:b
consumable_shortcut ^= wand of roots:c
consumable_shortcut ^= wand of warping:c
consumable_shortcut ^= wand of iceblast:c
consumable_shortcut ^= wand of mindburst:f
consumable_shortcut ^= wand of digging:d
consumable_shortcut ^= wand of charming:e
consumable_shortcut ^= wand of paralysis:e
consumable_shortcut ^= wand of polymorph:p
